first draft of diff drive (#4)
SciBorgs/SciGuides: DifferentialDrive.md

> # DIFFERENTIAL DRIVE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Differential Drive Project
```

Goals: Get an understanding of how to create a differential drive with advance controls. 

---

## Initial Setup

### Robot Code Structure

Robot code is structured using **subsystems** and **commands** within the **Command-Based Framework**. This architecture simplifies robot programming by breaking down complex tasks into smaller, manageable pieces:

- **Subsystems**: These represent individual components or systems on the robot, like the drivetrain or arm mechanism. They encapsulate the hardware and related functionalities. [Learn more about subsystems here](https://docs.wpilib.org/en/stable/docs/software/commandbased/subsystems.html).

- **Commands**: Commands are actions that the robot can perform, such as driving forward or rotating. These actions often involve multiple subsystems working together. [Learn more about commands here](https://docs.wpilib.org/en/stable/docs/software/commandbased/commands.html).

For a deeper dive into command-based programming, check out [this guide](https://docs.wpilib.org/en/stable/docs/software/commandbased/what-is-command-based.html).

### Setting up VScode

> After making a new branch for this project and opening up wpilib vscode, start by making a drive folder. Which then will have a drive.java file and a driveConstants.java file. 

Reviewer 2: That's actually something I was wondering about -- where do we want to have the setting up your computer stuff? We might want to put that in a separate doc.

And then what should we do for the intro to java docs? Should I have them use wpilib vscode for that somehow? I was thinking they'd install regular vscode for that, since it's good to have anyway, but they won't be using it for any of the other sciguides projects so idk

> Make sure you have the [REVlib vendor library](https://software-metadata.revrobotics.com/REVLib-2024.json) installed. Do this by searching up manage vendor libraries, then clicking on install online, and pasting the link. It will ask to build your code, click yes and it's fine if it fails. 

Reviewer 2: This is another thing i was thinking about -- you know how for the summer institute we had them fork a base repo that had everything? Maybe we shoud do that here as well

Make sure to practice good git habits when working on this and any other project. See this [reference sheet]() to learn how. 

## Basic Drivetrain

> A differential drive is a type of robot drivetrain where two separately driven wheels are used to move the robot. By varying the speed of each wheel, the robot can move forward, backward, and turn. This setup is widely used due to its simplicity and effectiveness in controlling the robot’s movement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A differential drive is a type of robot drivetrain where two separately-driven groups of wheels are used to move the robot. By varying the speed of each wheel, the robot can move forward, backward, or turn. This setup is widely used due to its simplicity and high degree of control over the robot’s movement.
```

#### How Differential Drive Works:
- **Forward/Backward Movement:** Both wheels move at the same speed in the same direction.
- **Turning:** The wheels move at different speeds or in opposite directions, causing the robot to turn.

### Implementation

### 1. Setting Up the Drivetrain

##### Motor Controllers
For this guide, we’ll be using CANsparkMAX motor controllers paired with NEO motors.

> - **CANsparkMAX:** A motor controller developed by REV Robotics designed specifically for controlling brushless motors like the NEO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **CANSparkMAX:** A motor controller developed by REV Robotics designed specifically for controlling brushless motors like the NEO.
```

- **NEO Motor:** A brushless motor designed by REV Robotics.

#### Drivetrain Motor Setup
<img src="https://docs.wpilib.org/en/stable/_images/layout.jpg">

> - Here you can see that there are 2 motors assinged to both sides of the drive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Here, we can see that there are 2 motors plugged into each side of the drivetrain. 
```

```java
 public Drive() {
        rightfollower.follow(rightLeader);
        leftfollower.follow(leftLeader);

        leftLeader.setInverted(true);

        drive = new DifferentialDrive(leftLeader::set, rightLeader::set);
    }
```
`setInverted` Allows motors on opposite sides of the drivetrain to spin in opposite directions to move the robot forward or backward. By default, if both motors are given the same positive value, they will spin in the same direction. However, for the robot to move forward, the motors need to spin in opposite directions.

`leftLeader::set` passes the `set` method of the `leftLeader` motor as a method reference. This is done so it can be called later by the `DifferentialDrive` class.

Now to actually make a drive method that will allow the motors to run, we will use the `tankDrive` method from the differentialDrive class. The `leftSpeed` and `rightSpeed` are specific values that tell the motors how fast to go. These will be provided through the driver's controller.
```java
public void drive(double leftSpeed, double rightSpeed){
        drive.tankDrive(leftSpeed, rightSpeed);
    }
```
#### Controlling the drivetrain

> Start off by making a driver xBoxController. This will require a port value which we also store in ports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start off by making a CommandXboxController for driving. This will require a port value which we also store in ports.
```

```java
private final CommandXboxController driver = new CommandXboxController(OI.DRIVER);
```

> - It is a standard convention to have operator as port 0 and driver as 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is standard convention to have operator as port 0 and driver as 1.
```

> Then to make sure we can drive throughout the entire game, we add a default command to the drive subsystem. A defualt comannd is a command that is called when no other command requires the subsystem, lasting for the whole match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, to make sure we can drive throughout the entire game, we add a default command to the drive subsystem. A default command is a command that is scheduled when no other command requires the subsystem.
```

```java
public static final double WHEEL_RADIUS = Units.inchesToMeters(3);
public static final Measure<Distance> CIRCUMFERENCE = Meters.of(2.0 * Math.PI * WHEEL_RADIUS);
public static final double GEARING =  8;

public static final Measure<Distance> POSITION_FACTOR = CIRCUMFERENCE.times(GEARING);
public static final Measure<Velocity<Distance>> VELOCITY_FACTOR = POSITION_FACTOR.per(Minute);
```
Now we just need to use the conversion method from the encoder class in `drive.java`
```java 
leftEncoder.setPositionConversionFactor(POSITION_FACTOR.in(Meters));
rightEncoder.setPositionConversionFactor(POSITION_FACTOR.in(Meters));

leftEncoder.setVelocityConversionFactor(VELOCITY_FACTOR.in(MetersPerSecond));
rightEncoder.setVelocityConversionFactor(VELOCITY_FACTOR.in(MetersPerSecond));
```
#### Resetting the Encoders

At the start of the match (or any time you need to reset the robot's position), it's important to reset the encoder values to zero. This ensures that your distance calculations start from a known point.

We'll reset the encoders during the subsystem initialization:
```java 
leftEncoder.setPosition(0);
rightEncoder.setPosition(0);
```

> #### adding a gyroscope 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Adding a gyroscope 
```

        rightEncoder.getPosition(), 
        new Pose2d(new Translation2d(), new Rotation2d()));
```
`new Rotation2d()` and `new Translation2d()` simply returns a value of 0. Which both give the starting position of the robot. This can be configured based on how and where you're robot will be starting each match.
#### Periodically Updating Odometry

To keep track of the robot’s position in real-time, we need to update the odometry regularly with the latest encoder readings. This will typically happen in the periodic() method, ensuring that position data is always up-to-date.

Here's how you might update odometry :
```java
public void updateOdometry(){
    odometry.update(
        gyro.getRotation2d(),             
        leftEncoder.getPosition(),        
        rightEncoder.getPosition()        
    );
}
```
Aside from updating our odometry, on some cases we might need to reset it. I will leave this up to you to figure out how to do. (Hint: `odometry` has a method called resetOdometry). We won't need it for this project but if you're using the drive for autos example, it is good to reset your odometry whenever autos start. 
#### Using `periodic()`

> To ensure that our odometry is constantly updating as the robot moves, we run the update odometry method periodically. Which is basically every tick (0.02 seconds). This will go in the `periodic()`method that our drive class obtains from inherting the `subsystemBase` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure that our odometry is constantly updating as the robot moves, we run the `updateOdometry()` method periodically every tick (0.02 seconds by default). This will go in the `periodic()` method that all subsystems inherit from SubsystemBase, including our drive class.
```

```java
@Override 
public void periodic(){
  updateOdometry();
}
```

> Last thing to finish up our basic drive will be to getting our pose based on the odometry. This is very simple as it just requires calling the `getPoseMeters` method from our odometry. Keep in mind this returns a pose2d.

Reviewer: What's a pose2d

### Unit Testing & System Checks
#### Unit Tests

Think of unit tests as a way to check that each small piece of your code—like a single motor or a sensor—is functioning properly on its own before you start putting them all together. It's much easier to fix problems when they’re isolated to a single component than when they’re all tangled up in the full system.
##### MAKE SURE TO CHECK OUT THIS [GUIDE](https://docs.wpilib.org/en/stable/docs/software/wpilib-tools/robot-simulation/unit-testing.html) FROM WPILIB ON HOW TO SETUP UNIT TESTS.

Let’s talk about the tests for our drivetrain. We'll start it by creating a driveTest.java file in the robot folder of the tests folder. 

First, we need to set things up before we run any tests. This is done in the setup() method:
```java
Drive drive;
CANSparkMax spark;

  @BeforeEach
  public void setup() {
    setupTests();
    drive = new Drive();
    spark = drive.getSpark();
  }
```

> - ```getSpark()``` is a simple method in drive.java that lets us use one of the motors: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `getSpark()` is a simple method in `Drive.java` that lets us use one of the motors: 
```

>     - ``` public CANSparkMax getSpark(){return leftLeader;}```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `public CANSparkMax getSpark() { return leftLeader; }`
```

Reviewer: Remember proper style for code please!

Next, we will need to reset our drive between every tests so we are able to experiment different things at once. 
```java
  @AfterEach
  void destroy() throws Exception {
    reset(drive);
  }
```

Once everything is set up, you can make tests with the `@Test` annotation. Here's a quick example of testing if our motors are getting voltage:
```java
   @Test
  public void testSparks() {
    drive.drive(1, 0);

    assert spark.getBusVoltage() > 3;
  }
  ```
  - 3 is a random number here, but it is small on purpose. The motor will need more voltage than 3 in order to properly run.

>   Another example: Here we are testing to see if our pose is changing as we drive: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another example: here, we test to see if our pose is changing as we drive: 
```

```java
  @Test
  public void testPose(){
    drive.drive(0.8, 0.8);

>     fastForward();

Reviewer: Explain what this method does and why it is needed.

    assertNotEquals(new Pose2d(), drive.getPose());
  }
```
  #### Running the tests

> To actually see if the tests are valid, open the wpilib command palette(ctrl + shift + p) and search ```Test Robot Code``` and press enter. After a bit, it will show you the results of all your tests in the terminal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To actually see if the tests are valid, open the WPILib command palette (top right corner logo) and search `Test Robot Code` and press enter. After it runs, it will show you the results of all your tests in the terminal. 
```
More accessible to access for different platforms

> ![alt text](image-3.png)

Reviewer: You should upload these images to the repository so that they show up, unless you can find a different way of getting them online.

> Unit tests should be made for most of your subsystems and are a great way to see if the logic behind the code actually makes sense and works. You should also try to test all parts of the subsystems to cover everything. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unit tests should be made for all key subsystems and are a great way to see if the logic behind the code actually makes sense and works. You should also try to test all parts of the subsystems to cover everything. 
```

Here's another simple test but for LEDs. 

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```
Turn the rest of the java code blocks below into java ones too.

@Test
  public void testRainbowTheme() {
    var rainbow1 = LedStrip.getBufferDataString(led.rainbowAddressableLEDBuffer());
    fastForward(2);
    var rainbow2 = LedStrip.getBufferDataString(led.rainbowAddressableLEDBuffer());
    assertNotEquals(rainbow1, rainbow2);
  }
  ```

>   If you just scan through the code, its easy to tell what the process is and what we're testing. Setting up the leds to a pattern, forwarding in time so that its a different color than before, and testing to make sure that the two colors are indeed different from each other. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you just scan through the code, it's easy to tell what the process is and what we're testing. We are setting up the LEDs to display a rainbow pattern, fast forwarding in time so that it's a different color than before, and testing to make sure that the two colors are indeed different from each other. 
```

>   The last type of assert most commonly used in tests is the `assertEqual`. This simply tests if two values are the same. Both in assertEqual and assertNotEqual, you can pass in a tolerance value that will pass the test if the two different values are within the tolarence. 

Reviewer: You might want to include an example (add / replace) that uses a delta instead

  
#### System Checks

> In addition to unit tests, it’s equally important to perform system checks to ensure the entire drivetrain is operating as expected in real-world conditions. Think of system checks as a quick health check for your robot before it hits the field. You want to make sure that everything is working as it should—motors, sensors, and all. This is usually done in real life and it's a good habit to run full robot system checks before your matches. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to unit tests, it’s equally important to perform system checks to ensure the entire robot is operating as expected in real-world conditions. Think of system checks as a quick health check before it hits the field. You want to make sure that everything is working as it should—motors, sensors, and all. This is usually done in real life and it's a good habit to run full robot system checks before your matches. 
```

> Here is a quick simple example of what a part of a drive system check might look like. The logic is similar to unit tests as we will run a part of the drive, and then check to see if it worked. Remember to import the Sciborg's Test Library and not the wpilib built in one. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a simple example of what a drive systems check might look like. The logic is similar to unit tests as we will run a part of the drive before checking to see if it meets expectations. Remember to import the SciBorgs' testing libraries and not the built-in WPILib class. 
```

> Step 1: Define the command to run the system check

Reviewer: Note that this is created in the subsystem b/c of easy access to internal methods to check conditions.

``` 
public Test systemsCheck() {
    
    Command testCommand = run(() -> drive(-0.8, -0.8)).withTimeout(0.5);
}
```
Step 2: Define the assertions
```
Assertion leftMotorCheck = Assertion.tAssert(
        () -> leftLeader.getAppliedOutput() > 1,
        "Drive System Check Left Motor Output",
        "Expected left motor output to be greater than 1");

    Assertion rightMotorCheck = Assertion.tAssert(
        () -> rightLeader.getAppliedOutput() > 1,
        "Drive System Check Right Motor Output",
        "Expected right motor output to be greater than 1");
```
- `tAssert` is a truth assert that asks for a condition, a fault name, and a little description of what we're actually checking.

Step 3: Combine the command and assertions into a Test
```
Set<Assertion> assertions = Set.of(leftMotorCheck, rightMotorCheck);
return new Test(testCommand, assertions);
```

> #### Running systems check

Reviewer: Note somewhere that this is all happening in `Robot.java`, where all subsystems' systems checks are combined into one huge one that gets run in the same command.

> To run the systems check, we use the `test` mode of the robot and declare this in robot.java. To get started, we need to make a command that's going to run whenever we enable `test` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the systems check, we use the `test` mode of the robot and declare this in robot.java. To get started, we need to make a command that's going to run whenever we enable `test` mode using the built-in test() trigger.
```

We should also introduce triggers somewhere here; seems like a decent place.

```java 
  public Command systemsCheck(){
    return Test.toCommand(drive.systemsCheck());
  }
```
To actually run this in test, we tell it to run the previous command whenever test mode is enable. (This is done in configureBindings):
```java
test().whileTrue(systemsCheck());
```
#### Viewing results 

> This is probably the most important part of systems check, checking if our tests passed. Using `FaultLogger` we are able to pass the results of our checks into networkTables and see them in both sim and `Elastic`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is probably the most important part of systems check, checking if our tests passed. Using `FaultLogger`, we are able to pass the results of our checks into NetworkTables and see them in both sim and `Elastic`. 
```

We should include an image of this somewhere when we can get one

Reviewer: Also should link to the logging doc later!!!

- Elastic is a dashboard that's great use for drive team as it lets you see a bunch of robot data on a nice layout. You don't necessarily need this app for the project and can view this in sim. 

> Make sure you are periodically updating FaultLogger in `robot.java`. (Done in the robot constructor)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you are periodically updating FaultLogger in `Robot.java`. 
```

```java
addPeriodic(FaultLogger::update, 2); 
```
Now launch the sim window (ctrl + shift + p) -> ```simulate robot code```.
Once it's loaded, click the `Test` mode and then open NetworkTables info.
![](image-1.png)
In Faults and Total Faults, we can see that we have indeed ran our checks and since there are no warnings, it is safe to assume that in this case the checks have passed. 
- To see this in Elastic, click `Test` and then head to Elastic. Right click, click add widgets, click `Faults` and drag and drop `Total Faults` and `Active Faults` onto the layout. You should see the following if the tests have passed. 

![](image-2.png)

Same with Unit Tests, it's good to have system checks for all runnable parts of the robot to ensure the robot is fully ready for the game. As a notice, please make sure to run system checks while the robot is ON the robot cart. 
### Simulation and Logging
To finish our project up, we are going to simlute the drive we've made. Please read the [Simulation reference sheet](https://github.com/SciBorgs/SciGuides/blob/main/Simulation.md) before continuing on with this. 

> Setting Up the Simulation

Reviewer: Header?

> To simulate the drivetrain, we’re going to use the DifferentialDrivetrainSim class. This simulation will model the physical characteristics of our robot—like the motors, mass, and wheel dimensions—so we can see how the code will affect the robot in a virtual environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To simulate the drivetrain, we’re going to use the `DifferentialDrivetrainSim` class. This simulation will model the physical characteristics of our robot—like the motors, mass, and wheel dimensions—so we can see how the code will affect the robot in a virtual environment.
```
Any docs pls

Here’s how we set it up in our constructor:
```java
private final DifferentialDrivetrainSim driveSim;
...
driveSim =
    new DifferentialDrivetrainSim(
        DCMotor.getMiniCIM(2),
        GEARING,
        MOI,
        DRIVE_MASS.in(Kilograms),
        WHEEL_RADIUS,
        TRACK_WIDTH,
        STD_DEVS);
```

> - Remember that all of these values would be stored in `driveConstants`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remember that all of these values would be stored in `DriveConstants.java`:
```

  ```
  public static final double TRACK_WIDTH = 0.7112;
  public static final double WHEEL_RADIUS = Units.inchesToMeters(3);
  public static final double GEARING =  8;
  public static final double MOI = 7.5;
  public static final Measure<Mass> DRIVE_MASS = Kilograms.of(60.0);
  public static final Matrix<N7, N1> STD_DEVS = VecBuilder.fill(0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0);
  ```

> By setting up the simulation this way, we’re creating a virtual model of our robot that behaves similarly to how it would in real life.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By setting up the simulation with these constants, we’re creating a physics model of our robot that behaves similarly to how it would in real life.
```

Before we start periodically updating our sim values, make sure to set the voltage to our sim drive in the `setSpeed` method: 
```java
driveSim.setInputs(leftVoltage, rightVoltage);
```

#### Simulation in Action: `simulationPeriodic`

> The `simulationPeriodic` method is where we update the simulation. This method is called regularly during the robot’s operation to keep the simulated sensors and drivetrain in sync with the rest of the code. We must put a `@Override` annotation above the method as it is inherited from extending to `subsystemBase`.

Reviewer: I mean `@Override` isn't really required, it just makes the complier ensure that it's getting the inherited method. Specify

```java
@Override
public void simulationPeriodic(){
  driveSim.update(0.02);  // Update the drivetrain simulation every 20ms
  leftEncoder.setPosition(driveSim.getLeftPositionMeters());
  rightEncoder.setPosition(driveSim.getRightPositionMeters());

>   gyroSim.setAngle(-driveSim.getHeading().getDegrees());

Reviewer: gyroSim isn't created anywhere, nor should it be. You can probably just make a double or Rotation2d that keeps track.

Reviewer: Also just making sure: you have this project somewhere in your folders and have tested that everything works, right? I was thinking you might want to add some gifs of the sim in the beginning to engage people from the beginning

- `gyroSim.setAngle`: Updates the simulated gyro angle based on the robot’s simulated heading.

This method ensures that our simulated sensors provide accurate feedback as the robot "moves" in the simulation, allowing us to test and tweak our code.

#### Logging: Capturing Important Data
Now let’s talk about logging. Logging is crucial for understanding how our robot behaves over time, diagnosing issues, and improving performance. We’re going to use Monologue for logging, which gives us a structured way to record and analyze data from the robot’s systems.

Here’s how we set up Monologue:
```java
private void configureGameBehavior() {
  Monologue.setupMonologue(this, "/Robot", false, true);
  addPeriodic(Monologue::updateAll, kDefaultPeriod);
  addPeriodic(FaultLogger::update, 1);
}
```
This initializes Monologue with our robot, setting up the logging system to capture data as the robot runs and makes sure Monologue logs data at regular intervals, which we’ve defined with kDefaultPeriod. By logging data regularly, we can later review how the robot performed and make informed adjustments to our code.

> #### Using @Log.NT for NetworkTables Logging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Using Monologue for NetworkTables Logging
```

> We use NetworkTables to make logging specific variables or objects easier. We’re going to use the `@Log.NT` annotation as it allows us to log key metrics in real-time while the robot is running, which we can then view on dashboards like Shuffleboard or SmartDashboard.

Reviewer: First sentence is correct but leaves out a lot. I would link to the Telemetry doc once merged

> Lets get started by making a field:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's get started by making a field:
```

```
Read up on the Sim. reference sheet to see when and what we should be logging through network tables. 

One other thing we're going to log is going to be our position on the field. Simply use the annotation on the `getPose` method:
```java
@Log.NT
public Pose2d getPose() {
  return odometry.getPoseMeters();
}
```
Another quick little thing we're going to log is to see if our motors are reaching their setpoints. This is done by returning the `atSetpoint` from both of the pid controllers and log the data:
```java
@Log.NT
public boolean atSetpoint() {
  return leftPIDController.atSetpoint() && rightPIDController.atSetpoint();
}
```
By logging these values, we can gain real-time insights into our robot’s performance, which is essential for making data-driven decisions and quickly diagnosing issues.

#### Updating the Robot: periodic
Finally, the periodic method is where we update various elements of the robot regularly during operation. It’s like the heartbeat of our subsystems. Specifically, we are going to update the field display with the robot’s current position, which helps us visualize its movement.
```java
field2d.setRobotPose(getPose());
```

#### Seeing the result

> Start by launching sim and opening up NetworkTables. In which you will see a Robot field, which will contain all of the things we've logged.

Reviewer: Since it's their first time opening up sim, they probably won't immediately see the field widget displayed. Link them to the sim gui doc and guide them on where to find it (smartdashboard iirc).

Reviewer: Not sure if those local images might show that, but they're not on the repo so they won't show until uploaded.

![alt text](image-4.png)

Since our driver port is 1, make sure your joystick is also on the same port value in sim or else it will not get any inputs. Lastly, to control the differential drive properly, the joystick will require to have 6 total `axis` as shown below. You can add more and change the bindings by going to `DS` then cliking on the settings of which ever keyboard you are using. 

![alt text](image-5.png)

> And now, have fun. Experiment by moving the robot around, I suggest to keep the NetworkTables up so you can see your pose values change as you drive and confirming if the motors are reaching the setpoints. 

Reviewer: Grammar (too lazy to suggest)
